v3.0.0: default to gams.transfer, element-text Sets, full alias support (breaking) (#112)
NREL/gdx-pandas: doc/source/overview.md

Author: The preamble to `Direct Conversion` is out of date, as it says unequivocally that the last column of set dataframes should be `True`.

That section also doesn't seem to say anything about aliases yet. 

Generally, revising that section to be more complete and informative would be helpful.

Author: Similarly, I think it would make sense to extend the extended Backend Classes example to include instances of writing set text, subsets, aliases, and special values. Those items can still be explained in more detail in subsequent sections, but including them up front clarifies that they are first class features.

Author: I also think Backend Classes would benefit from some more organization, e.g.:

```
## Backend Classes

### Set details

#### Set membership and element text

#### Subset relationships (domains)

#### Aliases

### Parameter, Variable, and Equation details

#### Special values
```

Maybe under the last H3 section it would also be helpful to provide a brief discussion on variable and equation types, with links to the relevant enums?

Author: Rewritten in bcca44f. The Direct Conversion preamble is now a three-bullet breakdown of how each symbol kind shapes the value columns — Sets/Aliases as element text (with row-presence membership), Parameters as floats (with the special-value mapping table linked), Variables/Equations with the five-column convention. `gdxpds.get_aliases()` was added as the high-level reader's alias counterpart to `get_subset_relationships()`; both are listed under "Additional functions" and shown in a paired `to_gdx(aliases=...)` / `get_aliases()` round-trip example. The old "Backend Classes" section was reorganized too — see the threaded replies below.

Author: Done in bcca44f. The Object-Oriented API example now exercises element text on `u`, an explicit `domain=[u]` subset on `sub_u`, an alias `au` of `u`, and a Parameter carrying GDX UNDEF (`None`) — all in one walk-through, with cross-references to the per-feature subsections below.

Author: Done in bcca44f. Reorganized exactly as you laid out — `### Set details` with `#### Set membership and element text`, `#### Subset (Domain) Relationships`, `#### Aliases`; `### Parameter, Variable, and Equation details` with `#### Variable and Equation types` and `#### Special values`. The new Variable/Equation types section links to {py:class}`GamsVariableType` and {py:class}`GamsEquationType` with the actual enum members listed (`Binary`, `Positive`, `Free`, `SOS1`, `SOS2`, `Semicont`, `Semiint`, etc.; `Equality`, `GreaterThan`, `LessThan`, `NothingEnforced`, `External`, `Conic`). Bumped `myst_heading_anchors` from 3 to 4 in `conf.py` so the new H4 anchors resolve in cross-references.

Author: Could we add tabs to the documentation and show POSIX (Mac/Linux), Windows Command Line, and Windows PowerShell?

Author: Done in bcca44f. Added `sphinx-design` to the `[docs]` extras, enabled `sphinx_design` in `conf.py`, and rewrote both shell-example blocks in the Configuration section as `{tab-set}` widgets with `POSIX (Mac/Linux)`, `Windows (CMD)`, and `Windows (PowerShell)` tabs. `sphinx-build` runs without warnings.

Author: Perhaps this should link back to Install ... Preliminaries (on index.md)?

Author: Done in bcca44f — "GAMS install location (`gams_dir`)" now opens with "See [Install → Preliminaries](index.md#preliminaries) for the recommended setup". The "I/O engine (`engine`)" paragraph also links to that anchor for the `gamsapi` install.

- {py:class}`gdxpds.gdx.GamsDomainType`
- {py:func}`gdxpds.gdx.append_set`
- {py:func}`gdxpds.gdx.append_parameter`

> - {py:func}`gdxpds.gdx.append_alias`

Author: nit: place `append_alias` after `append_set`

Author: Done in bcca44f — `append_alias` is now listed between `append_set` and `append_parameter` in the Object-Oriented API key-classes-and-functions listing.

If you prefer the simpler API that works with dicts of DataFrames, see [the `domains=` kwarg on `to_gdx` and `gdxpds.get_subset_relationships()`](#direct-conversion) for the string-based equivalent.

### Set membership and element text

> A Set (or Alias) `GdxSymbol` has a single value column whose entries are the GAMS **element text** — a string, with `""` denoting a member that has no text. Membership itself is conveyed by **row presence**: every row in the DataFrame is a member. On write, the value column is flexible — a Set can be built from the dimension columns alone, from a boolean column (any truthy/falsy value means "member, no text"), or from explicit text strings; only a non-empty string is written as element text.

Author: The legacy doc text likely still talks about the value column as primarily being a boolean.

Author: Done in bcca44f. The whole Direct Conversion preamble was rewritten — Sets are described as element text (row-presence membership, `""` for no text), with the boolean form mentioned only as one of the accepted *write* forms (auto-converted to "member, no text").

Author: Re-checked: the prose was rewritten in bcca44f. The remaining `True`s in the to_gdx examples are intentional — they exercise the *write* surface, where the value column can be booleans (auto-converted to `""` = "member, no text"). The read-side description (line 11) and the v3.0.0 migration note ("Set/Alias values are element-text strings, not booleans") both correctly describe the new behavior. No stale boolean text left in prose.

```python
import gdxpds.gdx
import pandas as pd
with gdxpds.gdx.GdxFile() as gdx:
    t = gdxpds.gdx.append_set(gdx, 't', pd.DataFrame({'i': ['a', 'b', 'c']}))
    gdxpds.gdx.append_alias(gdx, 'at', t)   # or append_alias(gdx, 'at', 't')
    gdx.write('data.gdx')
```

Aliases must be written after their parent Set. As with strict domains, build in dependency order or call {py:meth}`gdxpds.gdx.GdxFile.reorder_for_strict_domains` before writing.

From the dict-of-DataFrames API, pass an `aliases=` mapping (alias name → parent Set name) to {py:func}`gdxpds.to_gdx`:

```python
gdxpds.to_gdx(dataframes, 'data.gdx', aliases={'at': 't'})
```

:::{note}
Aliases of a *named Set* (the common case) are fully supported on both engines. A **universe alias** — an alias of the universe set `*` (`aliased_with` resolves to the file's `universal_set`) — reads without error and round-trips within a single engine, but the engines disagree on its membership (`gdxcc` includes the `*` element, `gams.transfer` does not), so it is not cross-engine identical.
:::

## Migration from 1.x / 2.x

> Releases 2.0.0 and 3.0.0 each made breaking changes. If you are upgrading from 1.5.x, you cross both — the relevant changes for callers are collected here.

Author: ```suggestion
Releases 2.0.0 and 3.0.0 each made breaking changes. In v2.0.0, old interfaces were removed for `to_dataframe` and accessing the `csv_to_gdx` and `gdx_to_csv` scripts. Version 3.0.0 switches the default engine to `gams.transfer` (from `gdxcc`) and supports set text and aliases as first-class features. Additional details and other breaking changes:
```

Author: Adopted in bcca44f — used your suggested preamble verbatim.

> **3.0.0 (breaking):**

Author: ```suggestion
### v3.0.0 breaking changes
```

Also place after 2.0.0

Author: Done in bcca44f — added the `### v3.0.0 breaking changes` heading and moved it after the v2.0.0 section (paired with the v2.0.0 heading suggestion in the next thread).

- **Default I/O engine is now `gams.transfer`** (when a compatible `gamsapi` is installed), falling back to `gdxcc`. To keep the previous behavior, pass `backend="gdxcc"` or set `GDXPDS_BACKEND=gdxcc`.
- **Set/Alias values are element-text strings, not booleans.** Reading a Set now yields a string value column (`""` for no text); membership is row presence. Code that checked a Set's value as a boolean should switch to testing row presence (or, for text, the string).
- **`load_set_text` is removed.** Element text is always read and written, so drop the argument from any `to_dataframe` / `to_dataframes` / `GdxSymbol.load` / `GdxFile.load_all` / `load_symbols` calls.
- **`GdxFile.H` is removed.** If you drove raw `gdxcc` calls through it, use `gdx_file._backend_impl.handle` instead.
- **GDX UNDEF is preserved on write** (round-trips as `None`) instead of collapsing to `0.0`.

> **2.0.0 (breaking) — also relevant if you skipped it:**

Author: ```suggestion
### v2.0.0 breaking changes
```

(Place before the v3.0.0 list.)

Author: Done in bcca44f — added `### v2.0.0 breaking changes` as a sibling heading, placed before `### v3.0.0 breaking changes`.

> gdxpds can move data between GDX files and DataFrames through either of two engines, named by string or {py:class}`gdxpds.Backend` value. (This "backend" is a different concept from the [Backend Classes](#backend-classes) above — the `GdxFile` / `GdxSymbol` objects; here it means the underlying read/write *engine*.)

Author: This is making me realize that `engine` would be a better name for this concept than `backend`. Since the feature is new this week (we've rapidly put out multiple releases), it might actually be worth making the name change now ...

Author: Done in bcca44f. Rename applied across the codebase. Public surface: `Engine` enum + `EngineError` exception, `engine=` keyword on every read/write entry point (`to_dataframes`, `to_dataframe`, `list_symbols`, `get_data_types`, `get_subset_relationships`, `get_aliases`, `to_gdx`, `GdxFile`), `GDXPDS_ENGINE` env var, `-b` / `--engine` CLI flag. Internal surface: `GdxEngine` / `GdxccEngine` / `TransferEngine` classes, `make_engine` / `resolve_engine` / `DEFAULT_ENGINE`, `_engine_impl` attribute, and the implementation files `_engine.py` / `_gdxcc_engine.py` / `_transfer_engine.py` (plus the corresponding `tests/test_engine_*.py` rename via `git mv`). No backward-compat shims — since the feature shipped this week, the break is clean. Test matrix PASS / PASS / PASS / OK across `.venv-gams-{34,49,51}` and `.venv-no-gams`.

The doc section that used to be called "Backend Classes" (the `GdxFile` / `GdxSymbol` object model) would have collided with the new engine concept, so it was renamed to "Object-Oriented API". CLAUDE.md got the same treatment.

- **`"gams_transfer"`** (the default, when usable) uses GAMS's `gams.transfer` library (shipped inside `gamsapi`). It is **much faster on large files** — roughly 2× faster to read and 4× faster to write a ~2 MB GDX, widening to an order of magnitude or more on hundreds-of-MB files — but its fixed per-file overhead makes it *slower* than `gdxcc` on very small files.
- **`"gdxcc"`** (the fallback) uses SWIG-bound `gdxcc` calls and works with either GAMS Python binding.

> `gams.transfer` is only usable when a compatible `gamsapi` is installed (see [Install](index.md#install)); check `gdxpds.HAVE_GAMS_TRANSFER` at runtime. The **default** prefers `gams.transfer` and quietly falls back to `gdxcc` when it isn't usable, so gdxcc-only environments are unaffected. An *explicit* request for an unavailable engine raises {py:class}`gdxpds.BackendError` rather than falling back. Both engines produce identical DataFrames and GDX files.

Author: ```suggestion
`gams.transfer` is only usable when a compatible `gamsapi` is installed (see [Install](index.md#install)); this is checked at runtime and stored in `gdxpds.HAVE_GAMS_TRANSFER`. The **default** prefers `gams.transfer` and quietly falls back to `gdxcc` when it isn't usable, so gdxcc-only environments are unaffected. An *explicit* request for an unavailable engine raises {py:class}`gdxpds.BackendError` rather than falling back. Both engines produce identical DataFrames and GDX files.
```

Author: Is "both engines produce identical DataFrames and GDX files," completely accurate, or should it be mildly caveated, e.g., "both engines produces idential DataFrames and GDX files under almost all circumstances"? If the latter, should we add or refer to one or more `::{note}`s?

Author: Adopted in bcca44f — used your suggested paragraph (lightly recombined with the install-link suggestion from #3305077402 and the "identical DataFrames and GDX files" caveat from #3305119669).

Author: Mildly caveated in bcca44f — the final clause now reads "...produce identical DataFrames and GDX files **under almost all circumstances** — see the [Subset (Domain) Relationships](#subset-domain-relationships) and [Aliases](#aliases) notes above for the known edge cases." The existing per-section `{note}` blocks (the mixed-domain edge case, the universe-alias membership disagreement, and the chained-alias on-disk asymmetry) are the linked-to caveats, so a reader who clicks through gets the full picture without scrolling back up.

> One behavioral difference between the engines is visible only **before a symbol's records are loaded**: `gdxcc` exposes a symbol's record count (`GdxSymbol.num_records`) and the file's `version`/`producer` from the GDX header, whereas `gams.transfer` does not (they read as `0` / `None` until the records are loaded). After loading — i.e. once you touch `GdxSymbol.dataframe`, or read with `lazy_load=False` — `num_records` reflects the DataFrame on both engines.

Author: The file's `version` / `producer` comment should be broken out into its own sentence, since those data are not populated after load a symbol. And so maybe this is "Two behavioral differences" instead of just one.

Author: Done in bcca44f — split into two clearly-labeled bullets under "Two behavioral differences between the engines:". The first bullet is the pre-load `num_records` difference (visible only before records are loaded; resolves after). The second bullet is the file-level `version` / `producer` difference (populated only by the `gdxcc` engine; `gams_transfer` leaves them as `None` regardless of load state).
